=begin pod

=TITLE Classes and Objects

=SUBTITLE A tutorial for creating and using classes in Perl 6

=comment More descriptive title?

The following program shows how a dependency handler might look in Perl 6.
It showcases custom constructors, private and public attributes, methods and
various aspects of signatures. It's not very much code, and yet the result
is interesting and, at times, useful.

    =begin code
    class Task {
        has      &!callback;
        has Task @!dependencies;
        has Bool $.done;

        method new(&callback, *@dependencies) {
            return self.bless(:&callback, :@dependencies);
        }

        submethod BUILD(:&!callback, :@!dependencies) { }

        method add-dependency(Task $dependency) {
            push @!dependencies, $dependency;
        }

        method perform() {
            unless $!done {
                .perform() for @!dependencies;
                &!callback();
                $!done = True;
            }
        }
    }

    my $eat =
        Task.new({ say 'eating dinner. NOM!' },
            Task.new({ say 'making dinner' },
                Task.new({ say 'buying food' },
                    Task.new({ say 'making some money' }),
                    Task.new({ say 'going to the store' })
                ),
                Task.new({ say 'cleaning kitchen' })
            )
        );

    $eat.perform();
    =end code

=head1 Starting with class

X<|class>
X<|classes>

X<|state>
X<|has>
X<|classes, has>
X<|behavior>
X<|classes, behavior>

Perl 6, like many other languages, uses the C<class> keyword to introduce a
new class.  The block that follows may contain arbitrary code, just as with
any other block, but classes commonly contain state and behavior
declarations.  The example code includes attributes (state), introduced
through the C<has> keyword, and behaviors introduced through the C<method>
keyword.

X<|type object>
X<|defined>
X<|.defined>

Declaring a class creates a I<type object> which, by default, is installed
into the current package (just like a variable declared with C<our> scope).
This type object is an "empty instance" of the class.  You've already seen
these in previous chapters. For example, types such as C<Int> and C<Str>
refer to the type object of one of the Perl 6 built-in classes. The example
above uses the class name C<Task> so that other code can refer to it later,
such as to create class instances by calling the C<new> method.

Type objects are I<undefined>, in the sense that they return C<False> if you
call the C<.defined> method on them. You can use this method to find out if
a given object is a type object or not:

    my $obj = Int;
    if $obj.defined {
        say "Ordinary, defined object";
    } else {
        say "Type object";
    }

=head1 State

X<|attributes>
X<|classes, attributes>

X<|encapsulation>
X<|classes, encapsulation>

The first three lines inside the class block all declare attributes (called
I<fields> or I<instance storage> in other languages).  These are storage
locations that every instance of a class will obtain.  Just as a C<my>
variable cannot be accessed from outside its declared scope, attributes are
not accessible outside of the class.  This I<encapsulation> is one of the
key principles of object oriented design.

The first declaration specifies instance storage for a callback -- a bit of
code to invoke in order to perform the task that an object represents:

    has &!callback;

X<|sigils, &>
X<|twigils>
X<|twigils, !>

The C<&> sigil indicates that this attribute represents something invocable.
The C<!> character is a I<twigil>, or secondary sigil.  A twigil forms part
of the name of the variable.  In this case, the C<!> twigil emphasizes that
this attribute is private to the class.

The second declaration also uses the private twigil:

    has Task @!dependencies;

However, this attribute represents an array of items, so it requires the
C<@> sigil. These items each specify a task that must be completed before
the present one can complete. Furthermore, the type declaration on this
attribute indicates that the array may only hold instances of the C<Task>
class (or some subclass of it).

The third attribute represents the state of completion of a task:

    has Bool $.done;

X<|twigils, .>
X<|twigils, accessors>
X<|accessor methods>
X<|classes, accessors>

This scalar attribute (with the C<$> sigil) has a type of C<Bool>.  Instead
of the C<!> twigil, the C<.> twigil is used. While Perl 6 does enforce
encapsulation on attributes, it also saves you from writing accessor
methods.  Replacing the C<!> with a C<.> both declares the attribute
C<$!done> and an accessor method named C<done>. It's as if you had written:

    has Bool $!done;
    method done() { return $!done }

Note that this is not like declaring a public attribute, as some languages
allow; you really get I<both> a private storage location and a method,
without having to write the method by hand. You are free instead to write
your own accessor method, if at some future point you need to do something
more complex than return the value.

Note that using the C<.> twigil has created a method that will provide
read-only access to the attribute. If instead the users of this object
should be able to reset a task's completion state (perhaps to perform it
again), you can change the attribute declaration:

    has Bool $.done is rw;

X<|traits, is rw>

The C<is rw> trait causes the generated accessor method to return something
external code can modify to change the value of the attribute.

You can also supply default values to attributes (which works equally for
those with and without accessors):

    has Bool $.done = False;

The assignment is carried out at object build time. The right-hand side is
evaluated at that time, and can even reference earlier attributes:

    has Task @!dependencies;
    has $.ready = not @!dependencies;

=head1 Static fields?

Perl 6 has no B<static> keyword. Nevertheless any class may declare anything
that a module can, so making a scoped variable sounds like good idea.

       =begin code

       class Singleton {
           my Singleton $instance;
           method new {!!!}
           submethod instance {
               $instance = Singleton.bless unless $instance;
               $instance;
           }
       }

       =end code

Class attributes defined by L<my> or L<our> may also be initialized when
being declared, however we are implementing the Singleton pattern here and
the object must be created during its first use. It is not 100% possible to
predict the moment when attribute initialization will be executed, because
it can take place during compilation, runtime or both, especially when
importing the class using the L<use> keyword.

    class HaveStaticAttr {
          my Foo $.foo = some_complicated_subroutine;
    }

Class attributes may also be declared with a secondary sigil -- in a similar
manner to object attributes -- that will generate read-only accessors if the
attribute is to be public.

=head1 Methods

X<|methods>
X<|classes, methods>

While attributes give objects state, methods give objects behaviors.  Let's
ignore the C<new> method temporarily; it's a special type of method.
Consider the second method, C<add-dependency>, which adds a new task to a
task's dependency list.

    method add-dependency(Task $dependency) {
        push @!dependencies, $dependency;
    }

X<|invocant>

In many ways, this looks a lot like a C<sub> declaration. However, there are
two important differences. First, declaring this routine as a method adds it
to the list of methods for the current class.  Thus any instance of the
C<Task> class can call this method with the C<.> method call operator.
Second, a method places its invocant into the special variable C<self>.

The method itself takes the passed parameter -- which must be an instance of
the C<Task> class -- and C<push>es it onto the invocant's C<@!dependencies>
attribute.

The second method contains the main logic of the dependency handler:

    method perform() {
        unless $!done {
            .perform() for @!dependencies;
            &!callback();
            $!done = True;
        }
    }

It takes no parameters, working instead with the object's attributes. First,
it checks if the task has already completed by checking the C<$!done>
attribute.  If so, there's nothing to do.

X<|operators, .>

Otherwise, the method performs all of the task's dependencies, using the
C<for> construct to iterate over all of the items in the C<@!dependencies>
attribute.  This iteration places each item -- each a C<Task> object -- into
the topic variable, C<$_>.  Using the C<.> method call operator without
specifying an explicit invocant uses the current topic as the invocant.
Thus the iteration construct calls the C<.perform()> method on every C<Task>
object in the C<@!dependencies> attribute of the current invocant.

After all of the dependencies have completed, it's time to perform the
current C<Task>'s task by invoking the C<&!callback> attribute directly;
this is the purpose of the parentheses.  Finally, the method sets the
C<$!done> attribute to C<True>, so that subsequent invocations of C<perform>
on this object (if this C<Task> is a dependency of another C<Task>, for
example) will not repeat the task.

=head1 Constructors

X<|constructors>

Perl 6 is rather more liberal than many languages in the area of
constructors.  A constructor is anything that returns an instance of the
class.  Furthermore, constructors are ordinary methods. You inherit a
default constructor named C<new> from the base class C<Object>, but you are
free to override C<new>, as this example does:

    method new(&callback, *@dependencies) {
        return self.bless(:&callback, :@dependencies);
    }

X<|objects, bless>
X<|bless>

The biggest difference between constructors in Perl 6 and constructors in
languages such as C# and Java is that rather than setting up state on a
somehow already magically created object, Perl 6 constructors actually
create the object themselves. The easiest way to do this is by calling the
L<bless> method, also inherited from L<Mu>. The C<bless> method expects a
set of named parameters providing the initial values for each attribute.

The example's constructor turns positional arguments into named arguments,
so that the class can provide a nice constructor for its users. The first
parameter is the callback (the thing which will execute the task). The rest
of the parameters are dependent C<Task> instances.  The constructor captures
these into the C<@dependencies> slurpy array and passes them as named
parameters to C<bless> (note that C<:&callback> uses the name of the
variable -- minus the sigil -- as the name of the parameter).

X<|BUILD>

Private attributes really are private. This means that C<bless> is not
allowed to bind things to C<&!callback> and C<@!dependencies> directly. To
do this, we override the C<BUILD> submethod, which is called on the brand
new object by C<bless>:

    submethod BUILD(:&!callback, :@!dependencies) { }

Since C<BUILD> runs in the context of the newly created C<Task> object, it
is allowed to manipulate those private attributes. The trick here is that
the private attributes (C<&!callback> and C<&!dependencies>) are being used
as the bind targets for C<BUILD>'s parameters. Zero-boilerplate
initialization! See L<objects|/language/objects#Object Construction> for
more information.

The C<BUILD> method is responsible for initializing all attributes, it must
handle default values too:

    has &!callback;
    has @!dependencies;
    has Bool ($.done, $.ready);
    submethod BUILD(
            :@!callback,
            :@!dependencies,
            :$!done = False,
            :$!ready = not @!dependencies
        ) { }

See L<Object Construction|/language/objects#Object_Construction> for more
options to influence object construction and attribute initialization.

=head1 Consuming our class

After creating a class, you can create instances of the class.  Declaring a
custom constructor provides a simple way of declaring tasks along with their
dependencies. To create a single task with no dependencies, write:

    my $eat = Task.new({ say 'eating dinner. NOM!' });

An earlier section explained that declaring the class C<Task> installed a
type object in the namespace.  This type object is a kind of "empty
instance" of the class, specifically an instance without any state.  You can
call methods on that instance, as long as they do not try to access any
state; C<new> is an example, as it creates a new object rather than
modifying or accessing an existing object.

Unfortunately, dinner never magically happens.  It has dependent tasks:

    my $eat =
        Task.new({ say 'eating dinner. NOM!' },
            Task.new({ say 'making dinner' },
                Task.new({ say 'buying food' },
                    Task.new({ say 'making some money' }),
                    Task.new({ say 'going to the store' })
                ),
                Task.new({ say 'cleaning kitchen' })
            )
        );

Notice how the custom constructor and sensible use of whitespace allows a
layout which makes task dependencies clear.

Finally, the C<perform> method call recursively calls the C<perform> method
on the various other dependencies in order, giving the output:

    making some money
    going to the store
    buying food
    cleaning kitchen
    making dinner
    eating dinner. NOM!

=head1 Inheritance

Object Oriented Programming provides the concept of inheritance as one of
the mechanisms to allow for code reuse.  Perl 6 supports the ability for one
class to inherit from one or more classes.  When a class inherits from
another class it informs the method dispatcher to follow the inheritance
chain to look for a method to dispatch.  This happens both for standard
methods defined via the method keyword and for methods generated through
other means such as attribute accessors.

TODO: the example here is rather bad, and needs to be replaced (or much
improved). See L<https://github.com/perl6/book/issues/58> for discussion.

    =begin code
    class Employee {
        has $.salary;

        method pay() {
            say "Here is \$$.salary";
        }
    }

    class Programmer is Employee {
        has @.known_languages is rw;
        has $.favorite_editor;

        method code_to_solve( $problem ) {
            say "Solving $problem using $.favorite_editor in "
            ~ $.known_languages[0] ~ '.';
        }
    }
    =end code

Now any object of type Programmer can make use of the methods and accessors
defined in the Employee class as though they were from the Programmer class.

    =begin code
    my $programmer = Programmer.new(
        salary => 100_000,
        known_languages => <Perl5 Perl6 Erlang C++>,
        favorite_editor => 'vim'
    );

    $programmer.code_to_solve('halting problem');
    $programmer.pay();
    =end code

=head2 Overriding inherited methods

Of course, classes can override methods and attributes defined by parent
classes by defining their own.  The example below demonstrates the C<Baker>
class overriding the C<Cook>'s C<cook> method.

    =begin code
    class Cook is Employee {
        has @.utensils  is rw;
        has @.cookbooks is rw;

        method cook( $food ) {
            say "Cooking $food";
        }

        method clean_utensils {
            say "Cleaning $_" for @.utensils;
        }
    }

    class Baker is Cook {
        method cook( $confection ) {
            say "Baking a tasty $confection";
        }
    }

    my $cook = Cook.new(
        utensils => <spoon ladle knife pan>,
        cookbooks => 'The Joy of Cooking',
        salary => 40000);

    $cook.cook( 'pizza' ); # Cooking pizza

    my $baker = Baker.new(
        utensils => 'self cleaning oven',
        cookbooks => "The Baker's Apprentice",
        salary => 50000);

    $baker.cook('brioche'); # Baking a tasty brioche
    =end code

Because the dispatcher will see the C<cook> method on C<Baker> before it
moves up to the parent class the C<Baker>'s C<cook> method will be called.

As a side note, you might have wondered how passing strings to an array
attribute worked. Array assignment is coercive, so the assignment turns the
new value into an array. This mechanism is also used for initializing
attributes.

=head2 Multiple inheritance

As mentioned before, a class can inherit from multiple classes.  When a
class inherits from multiple classes the dispatcher knows to look at both
classes when looking up a method to search for.  Perl 6 uses the C3
algorithm to linearize multiple inheritance hierarchies, which is a
significant improvement over Perl 5's approach to handling multiple
inheritance.

=comment isn't Perl 5 also C3 now?

    =begin code
    class GeekCook is Programmer is Cook {
        method new( *%params ) {
            push( %params<cookbooks>, "Cooking for Geeks" );
            return self.bless(|%params);
        }
    }

    my $geek = GeekCook.new(
        books           => 'Learning Perl 6',
        utensils        => ('stainless steel pot', 'knife', 'calibrated oven'),
        favorite_editor => 'MacVim',
        known_languages => <Perl6>
    );

    $geek.cook('pizza');
    $geek.code_to_solve('P =? NP');
    =end code

Now all the methods made available to the Programmer and the Cook classes
are available from the GeekCook class.

While multiple inheritance is a useful concept to know and occasionally use,
it is important to understand that there are more useful OOP concepts.  When
reaching for multiple inheritance it is good practice to consider whether
the design wouldn't be better realized by using roles, which are generally
safer because they force the class author to explicitly resolve conflicting
method names.  For more information on roles see L<Roles|/language/objects#Roles>.

=head1 Introspection

Introspection is the process of gathering information about some objects in
your program, not by reading the source code, but by querying the object (or
a controlling object) for some properties, such as its type.

Given an object C<$o>, and the class definitions from the previous sections,
we can ask it a few questions:

    if $o ~~ Employee { say "It's an employee" };
    if $o ~~ GeekCook { say "It's a geeky cook" };
    say $o.WHAT;
    say $o.perl;
    say $o.^methods(:local).join(', ');
    say $o.^name;

The output can look like this:

    It's an employee
    (Programmer)
    Programmer.new(known_languages => ["Perl", "Python", "Pascal"],
            favorite_editor => "gvim", salary => "too small")
    code_to_solve, known_languages, favorite_editor
    Programmer

The first two tests each smart-match against a class name. If the object is
of that class, or of an inheriting class, it returns true. So the object in
question is of class C<Employee> or one that inherits from it, but not
C<GeekCook>.

The C<.WHAT> method returns the type object associated with the object
C<$o>, which tells us the exact type of C<$o>: in this case C<Programmer>.

C<$o.perl> returns a string that can be executed as Perl code, and
reproduces the original object C<$o>. While this does not work perfectly in
all casesN<For example closures cannot easily be reproduced this way; if you
don't know what a closure is don't worry. Also current implementations have
problems with dumping cyclic data structures this way, but they are expected
to be handled correctly by C<.perl> at some point.>, it is very useful for
debugging simple objects.

C<$o.^methods(:local)> produces a list of methods that can be called on
C<$o>. The C<:local> named argument limits the returned methods to those
defined in the C<Employee> class and excludes the inherited methods.

The syntax of calling a method with C<.^> instead of a single dot means that
it is actually a method call on the I<meta class>, which is a class managing
the properties of the C<Employee> class -- or any other class you are
interested in. This meta class enables other ways of introspection too:

    say $o.^attributes.join(', ');
    say $o.^parents.map({ $_.^name }).join(', ');

Finally C<$o.^name> calls the C<name> method on the meta object, which
unsurprisingly returns the class name.

Introspection is very useful for debugging, and for learning the language
and new libraries. When a function or method returns an object you don't
know about, finding its type with C<.WHAT>, seeing a construction recipe for
it with C<.perl>, and so on, you'll get a good idea of what its return value
is. With C<.^methods> you can learn what you can do with the class.

But there are other applications too: a routine that serializes objects to a
bunch of bytes needs to know the attributes of that object, which it can
find out via introspection.

=end pod
