=begin pod

=TITLE Modules

=SUBTITLE How to create, use and distribute Perl 6 modules

=head1 Creating and Using Modules

A module is usually a source file or set of source filesN<Technically
a module is a set of I<compunits> which are usually files but could
come from anywhere as long as there is a I<compunit repository> that
can provide it. See L<S11|https://design.perl6.org/S11.html>.> that
expose Perl 6 constructs. These are typically packages
(L<classes|/language/objects#Classes>,
L<roles|/language/objects#Roles>, L<grammars|Grammar>),
L<subroutines|/language/functions>, and sometimes
L<variables|/language/variables>. In Perl 6 I<module> can also refer
to a type of package declared with the C<module> keyword (see example
below) but here we mostly mean "module" as a set of source
files in a namespace.

=head2 Basic Structure

Module distributions in Perl 6 have the same structure as any distribution in
the Perl family of languages:  there is a main project directory containing
a C<README> and C<LICENSE> file, a C<lib> directory for modules, a C<t>
directory for tests, and possibly a C<bin> directory for executable programs
and scripts.

Module files generally use the standard C<.pm> extension, and scripts or
executables use C<.pl>.  However, if you wish to highlight that the file is
written in Perl 6 you can use the C<.pm6> extension for modules, and the
C<.p6> extension for scripts.  Test files still use the normal C<.t>
extension.

=head2 Names

A I<name> is anything that is a legal part of a variable name (not counting
the sigil).  This includes

    $foo                # simple identifiers
    $Foo::Bar::baz      # compound identifiers separated by ::
    $Foo::($bar)::baz   # compound identifiers that perform interpolations
    $42                 # numeric names
    $!                  # certain punctuational variables

When not used as a sigil, the semantic function of C<::> within a name is to
force the preceding portion of the name to be considered a package through
which the subsequent portion of the name is to be located.  If the preceding
portion is null, it means the package is unspecified and must be searched
for according to the nature of what follows.  Generally this means that an
initial C<::> following the main sigil is a no-op on names that are known at
compile time, though C<::()> can also be used to introduce an interpolation
(see below).  Also, in the absence of another sigil, C<::> can serve as its
own sigil indicating intentional use of a not-yet-declared package name.

=head3 Package-qualified names

Ordinary package-qualified names look like:

    $Foo::Bar::baz      # the $baz variable in package Foo::Bar

Sometimes it's clearer to keep the sigil with the variable name, so an
alternate way to write this is:

    Foo::Bar::<$baz>

This is resolved at compile time because the variable name is a constant.

=head3 Pseudo-packages

The following pseudo-package names are reserved at the front of a name:

    MY          # Symbols in the current lexical scope (aka $?SCOPE)
    OUR         # Symbols in the current package (aka $?PACKAGE)
    CORE        # Outermost lexical scope, definition of standard Perl
    GLOBAL      # Interpreter-wide package symbols, really UNIT::GLOBAL
    PROCESS     # Process-related globals (superglobals)
    COMPILING   # Lexical symbols in the scope being compiled

The following relative names are also reserved but may be used
anywhere in a name:

    CALLER      # Contextual symbols in the immediate caller's lexical scope
    CALLERS     # Contextual symbols in any caller's lexical scope
    DYNAMIC     # Contextual symbols in my or any caller's lexical scope
    OUTER       # Symbols in the next outer lexical scope
    OUTERS      # Symbols in any outer lexical scope
    LEXICAL     # Contextual symbols in my or any outer's lexical scope
    UNIT        # Symbols in the outermost lexical scope of compilation unit
    SETTING     # Lexical symbols in the unit's DSL (usually CORE)
    PARENT      # Symbols in this package's parent package (or lexical scope)
    CLIENT      # The nearest CALLER that comes from a different package

The file's scope is known as C<UNIT>, but there are one or more lexical
scopes outside of that corresponding to the linguistic setting (often known
as the prelude in other cultures).  Hence, the C<SETTING> scope is
equivalent to C<UNIT::OUTERS>.  For a standard Perl program C<SETTING> is the
same as C<CORE>, but various startup options (such as C<-n> or C<-p>) can
put you into a domain specific language, in which case C<CORE> remains the
scope of the standard language, while C<SETTING> represents the scope
defining the DSL that functions as the setting of the current file.  When used
as a search term in the middle of a name, C<SETTING> includes all its outer scopes
up to C<CORE>.  To get I<only> the setting's outermost scope, use C<UNIT::OUTER> instead.

=head3 Interpolating into names

You may interpolate a string into a package or variable name using
C<::($expr)> where you'd ordinarily put a package or variable name.  The
string is allowed to contain additional instances of C<::>, which will be
interpreted as package nesting.  You may only interpolate entire names,
since the construct starts with C<::>, and either ends immediately or is
continued with another C<::> outside the parens.  Most symbolic references
are done with this notation:

    $foo = "Bar";
    $foobar = "Foo::Bar";
    $::($foo)           # lexically-scoped $Bar
    $::("MY::$foo")     # lexically-scoped $Bar
    $::("OUR::$foo")    # package-scoped $Bar
    $::("GLOBAL::$foo") # global $Bar
    $::("PROCESS::$foo")# process $Bar
    $::("PARENT::$foo") # current package's parent's $Bar
    $::($foobar)        # $Foo::Bar
    $::($foobar)::baz   # $Foo::Bar::baz
    $::($foo)::Bar::baz # $Bar::Bar::baz
    $::($foobar)baz     # ILLEGAL at compile time (no operator baz)

Note that unlike in Perl 5, initial C<::> doesn't imply global.  Here as part
of the interpolation syntax it doesn't even imply package.  After the
interpolation of the C<::()> component, the indirect name is looked up exactly
as if it had been there in the original source code, with priority given first
to leading pseudo-package names, then to names in the lexical scope (searching
scopes outwards, ending at C<CORE>). The current package is searched last.

Use the C<MY> pseudopackage to limit the lookup to the current lexical
scope, and C<OUR> to limit the scopes to the current package scope.

=head3 Direct lookup

To do direct lookup in a package's symbol table without scanning, treat the
package name as a hash:

    Foo::Bar::{'&baz'}  # same as &Foo::Bar::baz
    PROCESS::<$IN>      # Same as $*IN
    Foo::<::Bar><::Baz> # same as Foo::Bar::Baz

The C<::> before the subscript is required here, because the
C<Foo::Bar{...}> syntax is reserved for attaching a "WHENCE" initialization
closure to an autovivifiable type object.  (see S12).

Unlike C<::()> symbolic references, this does not parse the argument for
C<::>, nor does it initiate a namespace scan from that initial point.  In
addition, for constant subscripts, it is guaranteed to resolve the symbol at
compile time.

The null pseudo-package is reserved to mean the same search list as an
ordinary name search.  That is, the following are all identical in meaning:

    $foo
    $::{'foo'}
    ::{'$foo'}
    $::<foo>
    ::<$foo>

That is, each of them scans lexical scopes outward, and then the current
package scope (though the package scope is then disallowed when "strict" is
in effect).

As a result of these rules, you can write any arbitrary variable name as
either of:

    $::{'!@#$#@'}
    ::{'$!@#$#@'}

You can also use the C<< ::<> >> form as long as there are no spaces in the
name.

=head3 Package lookup

Subscript the package object itself as a hash object, the key of which is
the variable name, including any sigil.  The package object can be derived
from a type name by use of the C<::> postfix:

    MyType::<$foo>

=head3 Globals

Interpreter globals live in the C<GLOBAL> package.  The user's program
starts in the C<GLOBAL> package, so "our" declarations in the mainline code
go into that package by default.  Process-wide variables live in the
C<PROCESS> package.  Most predefined globals such as C<$*UID> and C<$*PID>
are actually process globals.

=head2 Loading and Basic Importing

Loading a module makes the packages in the same namespace declared
within available in the file scope of the loader. Importing from a
module makes the symbols exported available in the lexical scope of
the importing statement.

=head3 X<need|compunit>

C<need> loads a C<compunit> at compile time.

    need MyModule;

Any packages in the namespace defined within will also be available.

    # MyModule.pm
    unit module MyModule;

    class MyModule::Class { ... }

C<MyModule::Class> will be defined when C<MyModule> is loaded.

=comment class Class { ... } won't get exported automatically on loading...not sure if bug or..

=head3 X<use|compunit>

C<use> loads and then imports from a compunit at compile time.

    use MyModule;

It is equivalent to:

    =begin code :allow<L>
    L<need|/language/modules#need> MyModule;
    import MyModule;
    =end code

=head3 X<require|compunit>

C<require> loads a compunit and imports definite symbols at runtime.

    sub load-mymodule {
       say "loading MyModule";
       require MyModule;
    }

    load-mymodule();

The compunit name can be in a runtime variable if you put it inside an
indirect lookup.

    sub load-a-module($name){
       require ::($name);
    }

    load-a-module('MyModule');

To import symbols you must define them at compile time.

    sub do-something {
       require MyModule <&something>;
       something() # &something will be defined here
    }

    do-something();
    # &something will not be defined here


If C<MyModule> doesn't export C<&something> then it will fail.

=head2 Exporting and Selective Importing

=head3 is export

Packages, subroutines, variables, constants and enums are exported by marking
them with the L<is export> trait.

    =begin code
    unit module MyModule;
    our $var is export = 3;
    sub foo is export { ... };
    constant $FOO is export = "foobar";
    enum FooBar is export <one two three>;

    # Packages like classes can be exported too
    class MyClass is export {};

    # If a subpackage is in the namespace of the current package
    # it doesn't need to be explicitly exported
    class MyModule::MyClass {};
    =end code

As with all traits, if applied to a routine, "is export" should appear after
any argument list.

    =begin code
    sub foo (Str $string) is export { ... }
    =end code

You can pass named parameters to C<is export> to group symbols for exporting
then the importer can pick and choose. There are three predefined
tags: C<ALL>, C<DEFAULT> and C<MANDATORY>.

    =begin code
    # lib/MyModule.pm
    unit module MyModule;
    sub bag        is export             { ... }
    sub pants      is export(:MANDATORY) { ... }
    sub sunglasses is export(:day)       { ... }
    sub torch      is export(:night)     { ... }
    sub underpants is export(:ALL)       { ... }
    =end code

    =begin code
    # main.pl
    use lib 'lib';
    use MyModule;          #bag, pants
    use MyModule :DEFAULT; #the same
    use MyModule :day;     #pants, sunglasses
    use MyModule :night;   #pants, torch
    use MyModule :ALL;     #bag, pants, sunglasses, torch, underpants
    =end code

=head3 UNIT::EXPORT::*

Beneath the surface C<is export> is adding the symbols to a C<UNIT>
scoped package in the C<EXPORT> namespace. For example, C<is
export(:FOO)> will add the target to the C<UNIT::EXPORT::FOO>
package. This is what Perl 6 is really using to decide what to import.

    =begin code
    unit module MyModule;

    sub foo is export { ... }
    sub bar is export(:other) { ... }
    =end code

Is the same as:

    =begin code
    unit module MyModule;

    my package EXPORT::DEFAULT {
        our sub foo { ... }
    }

    my package EXPORT::other {
        our sub bar { ... }
    }
    =end code

For most purposes C<is export> is sufficient but the C<EXPORT>
packages are useful when you want to produce the exported symbols
dynamically. For example:

    =begin code
    # lib/MyModule.pm
    unit module MyModule;

    my package EXPORT::DEFAULT {
       for <zero one two three four>.kv -> $number,$name {
          for <sqrt log> -> $func {
             OUR::{'&' ~ $func ~ '-of-' ~ $name } := sub { $number."$func"() };
          }
       }
    }

    =end code

    =begin code
    # main.pl
    use MyModule;
    say sqrt-of-four; #-> 2
    say log-of-zero;  #-> -Inf
    =end code

=head3 EXPORT

You can export arbitrary symbols with an C<EXPORT> sub. C<EXPORT>
must return a L<Map>, where the keys are the symbol names and
the values are the desired values. The names should include the sigil
(if any) for the associated type.

    =begin code
    # lib/MyModule.pm

    class MyModule::Class { ... }

    sub EXPORT {
        {
         '$var'   => 'one',
         '@array' => <one two three>,
         '%hash'  => { one => 'two', three => 'four' },
         '&doit'   => sub { ... },
         'ShortName' => MyModule::Class
        }
    }
    =end code

    =begin code
    # main.pl
    use lib 'lib';
    use MyModule;
    say $var;
    say @array;
    say %hash;
    doit();
    say ShortName.new; #-> MyModule::Class.new
    =end code

Note, C<EXPORT> can't be declared inside a package because
presently rakudo (2015.09) seems to treat C<EXPORT> as part of the
compunit rather than the package.

Whereas C<UNIT::EXPORT> packages deal with the named parameters passed
to C<use>, the C<EXPORT> sub handles positional parameters. If you
pass positional parameters to C<use> they will be passed to
C<EXPORT>. If a positional is passed the module no longer exports
default symbols. You may still import them explicitly by
passing C<:DEFAULT> to C<use> along with your positional parameters.

    =begin code
    # lib/MyModule

    class MyModule::Class {}

    sub EXPORT($short_name?) {
        {
          do $short_name => MyModule::Class if $short_name
        }
    }

    sub always is export(:MANDATORY) { say "works" }

    #import with :ALL or :DEFAULT to get
    sub shy is export { say "you found me!" }
    =end code

    =begin code
    # main.pl
    use lib 'lib';
    use MyModule 'foo';
    say foo.new(); #MyModule::Class.new
    always();      #OK   - is imported
    shy();         #FAIL - won't be imported
    =end code

=head1 Distributing Modules

If you've written a Perl 6 module and would like to share it with the
community, we'd be delighted to have it listed in the L<Perl 6 modules
directory|https://modules.perl6.org>. C<:)>

For now, the process requires that you use git for your module's version
control.

The instructions herein require that you have a
L<GitHub|https://www.github.com> account so that your module can be shared
from its GitHub repository.

To share your module, do the following:

    =item Create a project directory named after your module. For
    example, if your module is C<Vortex::TotalPerspective>, then create a
    project directory named C<Vortex-TotalPerspective>. This project
    directory name will also be used as the GitHub repo name.

    =begin item
    Make your project directory look like this:

        Vortex-TotalPerspective/
        |-- lib
        |   `-- Vortex
        |       `-- TotalPerspective.pm
        |-- LICENSE
        |-- META.info
        |-- README.md
        `-- t
            `-- basic.t

    If your project contains other modules that help the main module do
    its job, they should go in your lib directory like so:

        lib
        `-- Vortex
            |-- TotalPerspective.pm
            `-- TotalPerspective
                |-- FairyCake.pm
                `-- Gargravarr.pm
    =end item

    =item The C<README.md> file is a L<markdown-formatted|https://help.github.com/articles/markdown-basics/> text file, which
    will later be automatically rendered as HTML by GitHub.

    =item Regarding the C<LICENSE> file, if you have no other preference,
    you might just use the same one that Rakudo Perl 6 uses. Just
    copy/paste the raw form of L<its license|https://github.com/rakudo/rakudo/blob/nom/LICENSE>
    into your own C<LICENSE> file.

    =item If you don't yet have any tests, you can leave out the C<t>
    directory and C<basic.t> file for now. For more info on how to write
    tests (for now), you might have a look at how other modules use
    C<Test>. It's quite similar to Perl 5's C<Test::More>.

    =item To document your modules, use L<Perl 6 Pod |
    https://design.perl6.org/S26.html> markup inside your modules. Module
    documentation is most appreciated and will be especially important once
    the Perl 6 module directory (or some other site) begins rendering Pod docs
    as HTML for easy browsing.
    N«
        Note, described above is a minimal project directory. If your project
        contains scripts that you'd like distributed along with your module(s),
        put them in a C<bin> directory. If you have extra docs (in addition to the
        Pod docs in your module(s)), create a C<doc> directory for them. If you'd
        like a graphical logo to appear next to your module at the module
        directory, create a C<logotype> directory and put into it a C<logo_32x32.png>
        file. At some point, you might also consider adding C<CONTRIBUTORS>, C<NEWS>,
        C<TODO>, or other files.
    »

    =begin item
    Make your C<META.info> file look something like this:

    =for code :allow<R>
    {
        "perl" : "6.*",
        "name" : "Vortex::TotalPerspective",
        "version" : "0.1.0",
        "description" : "Wonderful simulation to get some perspective.",
        "author" : "R<Your Name>",
        "provides" : {
            "Vortex::TotalPerspective" : "lib/Vortex/TotalPerspective.pm"
        },
        "depends" : [ ],
        "source-url" : "git://github.com/R<you>/Vortex-TotalPerspective.git"
    }

    For choosing a version numbering scheme, perhaps use
    "major.minor.patch" (see L<the spec on versioning |
    https://design.perl6.org/S11.html#Versioning> for further
    details). If the version number doesn't matter to you or your users
    right now, you can just put in an asterisk (*) for the version.

    In C<provides> section, include all the namespaces provided by
    your distribution and set C<perl> version to the minimum perl version
    your module works with

    =end item

    =item Put your project under git version control if you haven't done so
    already.

    =item Once you're happy with your project, create a repo for it at GitHub.
    See L<GitHub's help docs|https://help.github.com/> if necessary. Your
    GitHub repo should be named the same as your project directory. Immediately
    after creating the GitHub repo, GitHub shows you how to configure your
    local repo to know about your GitHub repo.

    =item Push your project to GitHub.

    =item Ping someone on IRC (#perl6 at freenode) to either show you how to
    add your module to the L<ecosystem|https://github.com/perl6/ecosystem>, or
    else ask them if they could please add it for you.

    =item After the pull request has been accepted, wait for an hour. If
    your module doesn't show up on L<https://modules.perl6.org/>, please
    view the log file at L<https://modules.perl6.org/log/update.log> to see
    if it identifies an error with your module or meta file.

B<That's it! Thanks for contributing to the Perl 6 community!>

If you'd like to try out installing your module, use the panda module
installer tool which is included with Rakudo Star Perl 6:

=code panda install Vortex::TotalPerspective

This will download your module to its own working directory (C<~/.panda>),
build it there, and install the module into C<~/.perl6>.

To use C<Vortex::TotalPerspective> from your scripts, just write
C<use Vortex::TotalPerspective>, and your Perl 6 implementation will
know where to look for the module file(s).

=end pod

# vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4 ft=perl6
