=begin pod

=TITLE role Baggy

=SUBTITLE Collection of distinct weighted objects

    class Baggy does QuantHash { }

A role for collections of weighted objects.  See L<Bag>, L<BagHash>, and
L<Mixy>.

=head1 Methods

=head2 method grab

Defined as:

    multi method grab(Baggy:D:) returns Any
    multi method grab(Baggy:D: $count) returns Array:D

Like L<pick|#method pick>, a C<grab> returns a random selection of elements, weighted
by the values corresponding to each key. Unlike C<pick>, it works only on mutable
structures, e.g. L<BagHash|/type/BagHash>. Use of C<grab> on an immutable structure results in an
C<X::Immutable> exception. If C<*> is passed as C<$count>, or C<$count> is greater than
or equal to the L<total|#method total> of the invocant, then C<total> elements from the
invocant are returned in a random sequence.

Grabbing decrements the grabbed key's weight by one (deleting the key
when it reaches 0). By definition, the C<total> of the invocant also decreases by one, so the
probabilities stay consistent through subsequent C<grab> operations.

    my $cars = ('Ford' => 2, 'Rover' => 3).BagHash;
    say $cars.grab;                                   # Ford
    say $cars.grab(2);                                # [Rover Rover]
    say $cars.grab(*);                                # [Rover Ford]

    my $breakfast = ('eggs' => 2, 'bacon' => 3).Bag;
    say $breakfast.grab;                              # throws X::Immutable exception

=head2 method grabpairs

Defined as:

    multi method grabpairs(Baggy:D:) returns Any
    multi method grabpairs(Baggy:D: $count) returns List:D

Returns a C<Pair> or a C<List> of C<Pair>s depending on the version of the method
being invoked. Each C<Pair> returned has an element of the invocant as its key and the
elements weight as its value. Unlike L<pickpairs>, it works only on mutable structures,
e.g. L<BagHash|/type/BagHash>. Use of C<grabpairs> on 'an immutable structure results in
an C<X::Immutable> exception. If C<*> is passed as C<$count>, or C<$count> is greater
than or equal to the number of L<elements|#method elems> of the invocant, then all
element/weight C<Pair>s from the invocant are returned in a random sequence.

What makes C<grabpairs> different from L<pickpairs|#method pickpairs> is that the
'grabbed' elements are in fact removed from the invocant.

    my $breakfast = (eggs => 2, bacon => 3).BagHash;
    say $breakfast.grabpairs;                         # bacon => 3
    say $breakfast;                                   # BagHash.new(eggs(2))
    say $breakfast.grabpairs(1);                      # (eggs => 2)
    say $breakfast.grabpairs(*);                      # []

    my $diet = ('eggs' => 2, 'bacon' => 3).Bag;
    say $diet.grabpairs;                              # throws X::Immutable exception

=head2 method pick

Defined as:

    multi method pick(Baggy:D:) returns Any
    multi method pick(Baggy:D: $count) returns Seq:D

Like an ordinary list L<pick|/type/List#routine_pick>, but returns keys
of the invocant weighted by their values, as if the keys were replicated
the number of times indicated by the corresponding value and then list
pick used. The underlying metaphor for picking is that you're pulling
colored marbles out a bag. (For "picking with replacement" see
L<roll|#method roll> instead). If C<*> is passed as C<$count>, or C<$count> is
greater than or equal to the L<total|#method total> of the invocant, then
C<total> elements from the invocant are returned in a random sequence.

Note that each C<pick> invocation maintains its own private state and has
no effect on subsequent C<pick> invocations.

    my $breakfast = bag <eggs bacon bacon bacon>;
    say $breakfast.pick;                              # eggs
    say $breakfast.pick(2);                           # (eggs bacon)

    say $breakfast.total;                             # 4
    say $breakfast.pick(*);                           # (bacon bacon bacon eggs)

=head2 method pickpairs

Defined as:

    multi method pickpairs(Baggy:D:) returns Pair:D
    multi method pickpairs(Baggy:D: $count) returns List:D

Returns a C<Pair> or a C<List> of C<Pair>s depending on the version of the method
being invoked. Each C<Pair> returned has an element of the invocant as its key and the
elements weight as its value. The elements are 'picked' without replacement. If C<*>
is passed as C<$count>, or C<$count> is greater than or equal to the number of
L<elements|#method elems> of the invocant, then all element/weight C<Pair>s from
the invocant are returned in a random sequence.

Note that each C<pickpairs> invocation maintains its own private state and has
no effect on subsequent C<pickpairs> invocations.

    my $breakfast = bag <eggs bacon bacon bacon>;
    say $breakfast.pickpairs;                         # eggs => 1
    say $breakfast.pickpairs(1);                      # (bacon => 3)
    say $breakfast.pickpairs(*);                      # (eggs => 1 bacon => 3)

=head2 method roll

Defined as:

    multi method roll(Baggy:D:) returns Any:D
    multi method roll(Baggy:D: $count) returns Seq:D

Like an ordinary list L<roll|/type/List#routine_roll>, but returns keys of the invocant weighted
by their values, as if the keys were replicated the number of times indicated
by the corresponding value and then list roll used. The underlying
metaphor for rolling is that you're throwing C<$count> dice that are
independent of each other, which (in bag terms) is equivalent to picking
a colored marble out your bag and then putting it back, and doing this
C<$count> times. In dice terms, the number of marbles corresponds to the
number of sides, and the number of marbles of the same color corresponds
to the number of sides with the same color. (For "picking without replacement"
see L<pick|#method pick> instead).

If C<*> is passed to C<$count>, returns a lazy, infinite sequence of randomly
chosen elements from the invocant.

    my $breakfast = bag <eggs bacon bacon bacon>;
    say $breakfast.roll;                                  # bacon
    say $breakfast.roll(3);                               # (bacon eggs bacon)

    my $random_dishes := $breakfast.roll(*);
    say $random_dishes[^5];                               # (bacon eggs bacon bacon bacon)

=head2 method classify-list

=comment TODO

=head2 method categorize-list

=comment TODO

=head2 method keys

Defined as:

    method keys(Baggy:D:) returns List:D

Returns a list of all keys in the C<Baggy> object without taking
their individual weights into account as opposed to L<kxxv|#method kxxv>.

    my $breakfast = bag <eggs spam spam spam>;
    say $breakfast.keys.sort;                        # (eggs spam)

    my $n = ("a" => 5, "b" => 2).BagHash;
    say $n.keys.sort;                                # (a b)

=head2 method values

Defined as:

    method values(Baggy:D:) returns List:D

Returns a list of all values, i.e. weights, in the C<Baggy> object.

    my $breakfast = bag <eggs spam spam spam>;
    say $breakfast.values.sort;                      # (1 3)

    my $n = ("a" => 5, "b" => 2, "a" => 1).BagHash;
    say $n.values.sort;                              # (2 6)

=head2 method kv

Defined as:

    method kv(Baggy:D:) returns List:D

Returns a list of keys and values interleaved.

    my $breakfast = bag <eggs spam spam spam>;
    say $breakfast.kv;                                # (spam 3 eggs 1)

    my $n = ("a" => 5, "b" => 2, "a" => 1).BagHash;
    say $n.kv;                                        # (a 6 b 2)

=head2 method kxxv

Defined as:

    method kxxv(Baggy:D:) returns List:D

Returns a list of the keys of the invocant, with each key multiplied by its
weight. Note that C<kxxv> only works for C<Baggy> types which have integer
weights, i.e. L<Bag> and L<BagHash>.

    my $breakfast = bag <spam eggs spam spam bacon>;
    say $breakfast.kxxv.sort;                         # (bacon eggs spam spam spam)

    my $n = ("a" => 0, "b" => 1, "b" => 2).BagHash;
    say $n.kxxv;                                      # (b b b)

=head2 method elems

Defined as:

    method elems(Baggy:D:) returns Int:D

Returns the number of elements in the C<Baggy> object without
taking the individual elements weight into account.

    my $breakfast = bag <eggs spam spam spam>;
    say $breakfast.elems;                             # 2

    my $n = ("b" => 9.4, "b" => 2).MixHash;
    say $n.elems;                                     # 1

=head2 method total

Defined as:

    method total(Baggy:D:)

Returns the sum of weights for all elements in the C<Baggy>
object.

    my $breakfast = bag <eggs spam spam bacon>;
    say $breakfast.total;                             # 4

    my $n = ("a" => 5, "b" => 1, "b" => 2).BagHash;
    say $n.total;                                     # 8

=head2 method default

Defined as:

    method default(Baggy:D:) returns Int:D

Returns zero.

    my $breakfast = bag <eggs bacon>;
    say $breakfast.default;                           # 0

=head2 method Set

Defined as:

    method Set() returns Set:D

Returns a L<Set|/type/Set> whose elements are the L<keys|#method keys> of the invocant.

    my $breakfast = (eggs => 2, bacon => 3).BagHash;
    say $breakfast.Set;                               # set(bacon, eggs)

=head2 method SetHash

Defined as:

    method SetHash() returns SetHash:D

Returns a L<SetHash|/type/SetHash> whose elements are the L<keys|#method keys> of the invocant.

    my $breakfast = (eggs => 2, bacon => 3).BagHash;
    my $sh = $breakfast.SetHash;
    say $sh.WHAT;                                     # (SetHash)
    say $sh.elems;                                    # 2

=head2 method ACCEPTS

=comment TODO

=head1 See Also

L<Sets, Bags, and Mixes|/language/setbagmix>

=end pod
