=begin pod

=TITLE class Uni

=SUBTITLE A string of Unicode codepoints

    class Uni does Positional[uint32] does Stringy 

Unlike L<Str|/type/Str>, which is made of Grapheme clusters, Uni is string
strictly made of Unicode codepoints. That is, base characters and combining
characters are separate elements of a C<Uni> instance. 

C<Uni> presents itself with a list-like interface of integer Codepoints.

Typical usage of C<Uni> is through one of its subclasses, C<NFC>, C<NFD>,
C<NFKD> and C<NFKC>, which represent strings in one of the L<Unicode
Normalization Forms|http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/> of the same name.

=head1 Methods

=head2 method new

    method new(*@codes) returns Uni:D

Creates a new C<Uni> instance from the given codepoint numbers.

=head2 method NFC

    method NFC(Uni:D:) returns NFC:D

Returns a NFC (Normal Form Composed)-converted version of the invocant.

=head2 method NFD

    method NFD(Uni:D:) returns NFD:D

Returns a NFD (Normal Form Decomposed)-converted version of the invocant.

=head2 method NFKC

    method NFKC(Uni:D:) returns NFKC:D

Returns a NFKC (Normal Form Compatiblity Composed)-converted version of the invocant.

=head2 method NFKD

    method NFKD(Uni:D:) returns NFKD:D

Returns a NFD (Normal Form Compatibility Decomposed)-converted version of the invocant.

=head2 method codes

    method codes(Uni:D:) returns Int:D

Returns the number of codepoints in the invocant.

=head2 method elems

    method elems(Uni:D:) returns Int:D

Returns the number of codepoints in the invocant.

=end pod

# vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4 ft=perl6
