=begin pod

=TITLE class Date

    class Date { }

A C<Date> is an immutable object identifying a day in the Gregorian calendar.

Date objects support addition and subtraction of integers, where an
integer is interpreted as the number of days. C<Date.today> creates
an object the current day according to the system clock.

    my $d = Date.new(2012, 12, 24); # Christmas Eve!
    say $d;                         # 2012-12-24
    say $d.year;                    # 2012
    say $d.month;                   # 12
    say $d.day;                     # 24
    say $d.day-of-week;             # 1  (that's Monday)
    my $n = Date.new('2012-12-31'); # New Year's Eve
    say $n - $d;                    # 7
    say $n + 1;                     # 2013-01-01


=head1 Methods

=head2 new

    proto method new() {*}
    multi method new($year,   $month,  $day) returns Date:D
    multi method new(:$year, :$month, :$day) returns Date:D
    multi method new(Str $date)              returns Date:D
    multi method new(DateTime:D $dt)         returns Date:D

Creates a new C<Date> object, either from a tripple of (year, month, day)
integers, or from a string of the form C<YYYY-MM-DD>
(L<ISO 8601|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601>), or from a DateTime
object.

=head2 today

    method today() returns Date:D

Returns a C<Date> object for the current day.

=head2 year

    method year(Date:D:) returns Int:D

Returns the year of the date

=head2 month

    method month(Date:D:) returns Int:D

Returns the month of the date (1..12)

=head2 day

    method day(Date:D:) returns Int:D

Returns the day of the month of the date (1..31)

=head2 day-of-week

    method day-of-week(Date:D:) returns Int:D

Returns the day of the week, where 0 is Sunday, 1 is Monday etc.

=head2 day-of-year

    method day-of-year(Date:D:) returns Int:D

Returns the day of the year (1..366).

=head2 day-of-month

    method day-of-month(Date:D:) returns Int:D

Returns the day of the month of the date (1..31). Synonymous to the C<day>
method.

=head2 succ

    method succ(Date:D:) returns Date:D

Returns the following day

=head2 days-in-month

    method days-in-month(year = self.year, month = self.month) returns Int:D

Returns the number of days in a month, where year and month default to that
of the invocant. If both year and month are provided, it can be called as
a class method.

=head2 is-leap-year

    method is-leap-year($year = self.year) returns Bool:D

Returns C<True> if C<$year> is a leap year. Can be called as a class method
if the year is provided.

=head2 prev

    method prev(Date:D:) return Date:D

Returns the previous day

=head2 Str

    multi method Str(Date:D:) returns Str:D

Returns the date in C<YYYY-MM-DD> format (L<ISO 8601|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601>)

=head2 gist

    multi method gist(Date:D:) returns Str:D

Returns the date in C<YYYY-MM-DD> format (L<ISO 8601|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601>)

=head2 

=end pod
