=begin pod

=TITLE role Setty

    class Setty does QuantHash { }

A role for collections of unique objects. See L<Set> and L<SetHash>.

=head1 Methods

=head2 grab

    method grab($count = 1)

Like C<pick>, a C<grab> returns a random selection of elements, deleting
the elements as they are picked. Unlike C<pick>, it works only on
mutable structures.  Use of C<grab> on an immutable structure results in
an exception (much like C<push> would).

=head2 grabpairs

    method grabpairs($count = 1)

Similar to L<grab>, but instead of returning keys, returns the grabbed values as a list
of C<Pair> objects, whose keys are the deleted keys and whose values are C<True>.

=head2 pick

    method pick($count = 1)

Returns C<$count> elements chosen at random and without repetition from the
C<Setty> object.

=head2 roll

    method roll($count = 1)

=head2 keys

The keys of a C<Setty> object are just its elements. Therefore, C<keys> simply
returns a list of the object's elements.

=head2 values

The values of a C<Setty> object are always C<True>. Therefore, C<values> simply
returns a list containing as many C<True>s as the object has elements

=head2 kv

Returns a list of elements and C<True> values interleaved.

=head2 elems

    method elems(--> Int)

The number of elements.

=head2 total

    method total(--> Int)

The total of all the values of the C<QuantHash> object. For a C<Setty>
object, this is just the number of elements.

=head2 new-fp

    method new-fp(*@pairs --> Setty)

Creates a new C<Setty> object from a list of pairs.

=head2 ACCEPTS

    method ACCEPTS($other)

Returns C<True> if C<$other> and C<self> contain all the same elements,
and no others.

=end pod
