=begin pod

=TITLE role IO

=SUBTITLE Tag role for all input/output types

    role IO { }

The IO role provides no functionality itself, and moreso just marks if a
particular object relates to input/output.

=head1 Routines

=head2 sub print

Print the given text on C<$*OUT> (standard output), e.g.:

    print "Hi there!\n";   # Hi there!

Note that the C<print> function does I<not> (in contrast to some other
languages) append a newline character to the text.  Thus the following code

    print "Hi there!";
    print "How are you?";

displays

    Hi there!How are you?

To print text implicitly including the trailing newline character, use
L<say|type/IO#sub say>.

=head2 sub say

Print the given text, followed by a newline C<"\n"> on C<$*OUT> (standard
output).

With C<say>, the example code as mentioned in the C<print> section will be
displayed as the user likely intended:

    say "Hi there!";
    say "How are you?";

displays

    Hi there!
    How are you?

C<say> prints non-C<Str> objects by calling their C<.gist> method before
printing.  Hence the following C<say> statements for the respective
containers are equivalent:

=begin code
    my @array = qw{1 2 3 4};
    say @array;       # 1 2 3 4␤
    say @array.gist;  # 1 2 3 4␤

    my %hash = "a" => 1, "b" => 2, "c" => 3;
    say %hash;        # a => 1, b => 2, c => 3␤
    say %hash.gist;   # a => 1, b => 2, c => 3␤
=end code

=head2 sub note

Print the given text, followed by a newline C<"\n"> on C<$*ERR> (standard
error).  Before printing, call the C<.gist> method on any non-C<Str>
objects.

C<note> is effectively C<say>, only it writes its output to the standard
error stream.  For instance:

=begin code
    if ("path/to/pirate/treasure".IO.e) {
	say "Found pirate treasure!";
    }
    else {
	note "Could not find pirate treasure.  Are you sure it exists?";
    }
=end code

will report (on the standard output stream) that treasure has been found if
it exists or will note on the error stream that it couldn't be found if it
doesn't exist.

=head2 sub dd

The Tiny Data Dumper.  This function takes the input list of variables and
C<note>s them (on C<$*ERR>) in an easy to read format, along with the
C<name> of the variable.  Thus,

    my $a = 42;
    my %hash = "a" => 1, "b" => 2, "c" => 3;
    dd %hash, $a;

prints

    %hash = ("a" => 1, "c" => 3, "b" => 2).hash, $a = 42

to the standard error stream.

This is in spirit similar to Perl 5's L<Data::Dumper
module|http://perldoc.perl.org/Data/Dumper.html>.

=head2 sub prompt

    sub prompt($msg)

Prints C<$msg> to the standard output and waits
for the user to type in something and finish with an ENTER.
Returns the string typed in without the trailing newline.

    my $name = prompt("Hi, what's your name? ");

=head2 sub open

    my $fh = open($path as IO, *%opts);

Opens the C<$path> as an C<IO> object (by default in text mode) with the
given options, returning an L<IO::Handle> object.

=head3 File mode options

=item read-only mode, C<:r>

Open the file as read only, e.g.:

    my $fh = open("path/to/file", :r);

This is the default mode for C<open>.

Write-related methods on the returned C<IO::Handle> object will fail in this
mode:

    my $fh = open("test");   # the file "test" already exists
    spurt $fh, "new text\n";
    Failed to write bytes to filehandle: bad file descriptor

=item write-only mode, C<:w>

Open the file for writing, creating it if it doesn't exist or overwriting
the file if it does exist, e.g.:

    my $fh = open("path/to/file", :w);

Read-related methods will fail in this mode:

    my $fh = open("test", :w);
    spurt $fh, "stuff\n";
    spurt $fh, "more stuff\n";
    $fh.seek(0, 0);   # return to the start of the file
    $fh.get();        # Reading from filehandle failed: bad file descriptor

=item read-write mode, C<:rw>

Open the file for reading and writing, creating the file if it doesn't
exist or overwriting the file if it already exists.

    my $fh = open("path/to/file", :w);

=item append mode, C<:a>

Open the file for appending.  If the file does not exist, create it.  If the
file already exists, append data to it.

    my $fh = open("path/to/file", :a);

=head3 Encoding options

=item binary mode, C<:bin>

Open the file in binary mode (byte mode):

    my $fh = open("path/to/file", :bin);

A file opened with C<:bin> may still be processed line-by-line, but IO will
be in terms of L<Buf|/type/Buf> rather than L<Str|/type/Str> types.  Default
is C<False>, implying text semantics.

=item text mode encoding, C<:enc>

Encoding to use if opened in text mode.

    # open explicitly as utf8
    my $fh = open("path/to/file", enc => "utf8");
    my $fh = open("path/to/file", enc => "utf-8");  # this form also works
    # open with latin1 encoding
    my $fh = open("path/to/file", enc => "latin1");

Defaults to "Unicode", which implies figuring out which actual UTF is in
use, either from a BOM or other heuristics.  If heuristics are inconclusive,
UTF-8 will be assumed.  (No 8-bit encoding will ever be picked implicitly.)
There exists no valid option with the name "Unicode", so the following will
result in an error:

    my $fh = open("path/to/file", enc => "Unicode");

This is because one needs to specify a specific unicode encoding, e.g.
"utf8".

=head3 Newline options

=item end-of-line (EOL) marker, C<:nl>

The marker used to indicate the end of a line of text.  Only used in text
mode.  Defaults to "EOL", which implies accepting any combination of C<"\n">,
C<"\r\n"> or C<"\r"> or any other Unicode character that has the C<Zl>
(Separator, Line) property.

    # explicitly use CR-LF as EOL character
    my $fh = open("path/to/file", nl => "\r\n");

=item chomp mode, C<:chomp>

Whether or not to remove newline characters from text obtained with
C<.lines> and C<.get>.  Defaults to C<True>.

    # don't remove newline characters from input
    my $fh = open("path/to/file", chomp => False);
    say $fh.get();     # returns line including newline char

=head2 method close

To close an open file handle, simply call its
L<close|/type/IO::Handle#method close> method:

    my $fh = open("path/to/file");
    # ... do stuff with the file
    $fh.close;

It is also possible to call this as a sub, thus the example above can be
written equivalently like so:

    my $fh = open("path/to/file");
    # ... do stuff with the file
    close $fh;

When a file was opened for writing, closing it is important to ensure that all
contents are actually written to the file.

=head2 sub dir

    sub dir(Cool $path = '.', Mu :$test = none('.', '..'))

Returns a list of L<IO::File> and L<IO::Path> objects for the
files and directories found in the $path. If $path is not given
assumes the current directory.

A second optional parameter can be given that will be
matched against the strings to filter out certain entries.
By default it filters out the '.' and '..' entries.

Examples:

    for dir() -> $file {
       say $file;
    }

    dir('path/to/directory');

To include all the entries (including . and ..) write:

    dir(test => all())

To include only entries with a .pl extension write:

    dir(test => /.pl$/)

=head2 sub slurp

Slurps the contents of the entire file into a C<Str> (or C<Buf> if C<:bin>).
Accepts C<:bin> and C<:enc> optional named parameters, with the same meaning
as L</open()>.  The routine will C<fail> if the file does not exist, or is a
directory.

    # read entire file as (Unicode) Str
    my $text_contents   = slurp "path/to/file";

    # read entire file as Latin1 Str
    my $text_contents   = slurp "path/to/file", enc => "latin1";

    # read entire file as Buf
    my $binary_contents = slurp "path/to/file", :bin;

=head2 sub spurt

    sub spurt ($where, $what,
        Str  :$enc        = $*ENC,
        Bool :append      = False,
        Bool :$createonly = False,
        --> Bool ) is export

Writes the indicated contents (2nd positional parameter, C<$what>) to the
location indicated by the first positional parameter, C<$where> (which can
either be a string, an C<IO::Path> object, or an already opened
C<IO::Handle> object).

If a file needs to be opened for writing, it will also be C<close>d.  Returns
True on success, or the appropriate C<Failure> if something went wrong.

These named parameters are optional and only have meaning if the first
positional parameter was B<not> an C<IO::Handle>:

=head3 Options

=item :enc

The encoding with which the contents will be written.

=item :append

Boolean indicating whether to append to a (potentially) existing file.  If
the file did not exist yet, it will be created.  Defaults to C<False>.

=item :createonly

Boolean indicating whether to fail if the file already exists.  Defaults to
C<False>.

=head3 Examples

    # write directly to a file
    spurt "path/to/file", "default text, directly written";

    # write to an IO::Handle
    my $fh = "path/to/file", :w;
    spurt $fh, "default text, written via IO::Handle";
    $fh.close;

    # write directly with a non-Unicode encoding
    spurt "path/to/latin1_file", "latin1 text: äöüß", enc => "latin1";

    # append to a pre-existing file
    spurt "file_already_exists", "some text";
    spurt "file_already_exists", "new text", :append;
    slurp "file_already_exists";   # some text␤new text

    # fail when writing to a pre-existing file
    spurt "file_already_exists", "new text", :createonly;
    File 'test' already exists, and :createonly was specified

=head2 sub mkdir

    multi sub mkdir(Int:D $mode, *@dirnames, :$CWD = $*CWD);
    multi sub mkdir($path, $mode = 0o777, :$CWD = $*CWD);

Creates one or more directories with the
L<permissions|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_system_permissions#Traditional_Unix_permissions>
specified as an integer (thought still subject to
L<umask|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umask>).

Throws an exception of type L<X::IO::Mkdir|/type/X::IO::Mkdir> if the
directory cannot be created.

=head2 sub run

    sub run(*@args ($, *@)) returns Proc::Status:D

Runs an external command without involving a shell (if possible). Expects the
command and each of its command line arguments as a list.

The return value is of L<type Proc::Status|/type/Proc::Status>.

    run 'systemctl', 'restart', 'apache2'

Arguments are not subject to shell expansions, shell variable interpolation or
other shenanigans. See L<#sub shell> if you want that.

=head2 sub shell

    sub shell($cmd) returns Proc::Status:D

Runs a command through the system shell. All shell meta characters are
interpreted by the shell, inluding pipes, redirects, environment variable
substitutions and so on. See L<#sub run> if you don't want that.

The return value is of L<type Proc::Status|/type/Proc::Status>.

    shell 'ls -lR | gzip -9 > ls-lR.gz';

=end pod
