=begin pod

=TITLE class Seq

=SUBTITLE An iterable, lazy sequence of values

    class Seq is Cool does Iterable does PositionalBindFailover { }

A C<Seq> represents anything that can lazily produce a sequence of values. A
C<Seq> is born in a state where iterating it will consume the values. However,
calling .list on a Seq will return a List that is still lazy, but stores the
generated values for later access. The same is true when assigning a Seq to an
array.

A typical use case is L<method C<lines> in C<IO::Handles>|/type/IO::Handles#method lines>,
which could use quite much memory if it stored all the lines read from the
file. So

    for open('README').lines -> $line {
        say $line;
    }

won't keep all lines from the file in memory.

This implies that you cannot iterate the same C<Seq> object twice (otherwise
it couldn't throw away old values), so this dies:

=begin code :allow<L>
my \lines := open('README').lines;
for lines { .say };
for lines { .say }; # dies with "This Seq has already been iterated [...]"
                    # of type L<X::Seq::Consumed>
=end code

A high-level construct to generate a C<Seq> is C<gather/take>, as well as many
built-in methods like C<map> and C<grep>, low-level constructors to create a
Seq from an iterator or from looping constrcuts are available too.

=head1 Methods

=head2 method new

    method new(Iterator:D $iter) returns Seq:D

Creates a new C<Seq> object from the iterator passed as the single argument.

=head2 method iterator

    method iterator(Seq:D:) returns Iterator:D

Returns the underlying iterator, and marks the invocant as consumed.
If called on an already consumed sequence, throws an error of type
L<X::Seq::Consumed>.

=head2 method is-lazy

    method is-lazy(Seq:D:) returns Bool:D

Returns C<True> if the sequence is lazy and potentially infinite, and C<False>
otherwise.
If called on an already consumed sequence, throws an error of type
L<X::Seq::Consumed>.

=head2 method eager

    method eager(Seq:D:) returns Bool:D

Returns an eagerly evalauted L<List|/type/List> based on the invocant
sequence, and marks it as consumed.
If called on an already consumed sequence, throws an error of type
L<X::Seq::Consumed>.


=head2 method from-loop

    proto method from-loop(|) returns Seq:D
    multi method from-loop(&body)
    multi method from-loop(&body, &cond, :$repeat)
    multi method from-loop(&body, &cond, &afteward)

Creates a new C<Seq> based callbacks.

The first form produces an infinite C<Seq> by calling C<&body> each time a new
element is requested, using the return value from C<&body> as the item. This
emulates (or implements) a C<loop { body }> construct.

The second form calls C<&cond> before each call to C<&body>, and terminates
the sequence if C<&cond> returns a false value. If C<$repeat> is set to a true
value, the first call to C<&cond> is omitted, and C<&body> called right away.
This emulates (or implements) C<while cond { body }> and
C<repeat { body } while cond> loops.

The third form enables C-style looping by calling a third callback,
C<&afterward>, after each call to C<&body>.

=end pod
