=begin pod

=TITLE Testing

=SUBTITLE Writing and running tests in Perl 6

Testing code is an integral part of software development.  For instance, how
can one be sure the code works if there isn't some way to verify it behaves
as desired?  This is the role of tests: to provide automated, repeatable
verifications of code behaviour.

In Perl 6, the C<Test> module provides a testing framework similar to the
traditional Perl 5 L<Test::More|http://perldoc.perl.org/Test/More.html>
module.  Thus, anyone familiar with C<Test::More> (and friends) should be
comfortable with Perl 6's C<Test> module.  The C<Test> module is the testing
module used by the official spectest suite.

The testing functions emit output conforming to the L<Test Anything
Protocol|http://testanything.org>.

=head1 Writing tests

As with any Perl project, the tests live under the C<t> directory in the
project's base directory.

A typical test file looks something like this:

    use v6;
    use Test;
    use lib 'lib';

    plan $num-tests;

    # .... tests

We ensure that we're using Perl 6, via the C<use v6> pragma, then we load
the C<Test> module and specify where our libraries are.  We then specify how
many tests we I<plan> to run (such that the testing framework can tell us if
more or fewer tests were run than we expected) and when finished with the
tests, we tell the framework that we are I<done> testing.

=head1 Running tests

One can run tests individually by specifying the test filename on the
command line:

    $ perl6 t/test-filename.t

Or via the L<prove|http://perldoc.perl.org/prove.html> command from Perl 5,
where one specifies C<perl6> as the executable to run the tests:

    $ prove --exec perl6 -r t

=head1 Test plans

=item plan

Specify the total number of tests, usually specified at the beginning of a
test file.

    plan 15;   # expect to have run 15 tests

In L<subtest>s, C<plan> is used to specify the total number of tests within
the subtest.

If a C<plan> is used, it is not necessary to denote the end of testing with
C<done>.

=item done

Specify that testing has finished.  Use this function when you do not as yet
have a L<plan> for the number of tests to run.  A C<plan> is thus not
required when using C<done>.

=head1 Test functions

The C<Test> module exports the following functions to aid in structuring and
organising tests:

=head2 Unconditional passing/failing/notification

=item pass($description?), flunk($description?)

The C<pass> function marks a test as passed.  C<flunk> marks a test as
B<not> passed.  Both functions accept an optional test C<$description>.

    pass "Actually, this test has passed";

    flunk "But this one hasn't passed";

As the Perl 5 documentation for C<Test::More> notes, such constructs are
used when one has a complicated test condition.  As such, they should be
used very, very sparingly.

=item diag($message);

Display diagnostic information in a TAP-compatible manner on the standard
error stream.  It is usually used when a particular test has failed to
provide information that the test itself did not provide.  Or it can be used
to provide visual markers on how the testing of a test-file is progressing
(which can be important when doing stress testing).

    diag "Yay!  The tests got to here!";

=head2 Skipping tests

Sometimes tests just aren't ready to be run, for instance a feature might
not yet be implemented, in which case tests can be marked as L<todo>.  It
could be the case that a given feature only works on a particular platform.
In which case one can L<skip> tests.

=item todo($reason, $count = 1)

Mark the following C<$count> tests as TODO, giving a C<$reason> as to why.
By default only one test following a call to C<todo> will be marked TODO.

    todo "Fromble not yet implemented";  # mark the next test TODO
    is(fromble(), "frombled");           # fromble() won't be tested

=item skip($reason, $count = 1)

Skip the following C<$count> tests, giving a C<$reason> as to why.  By
default only one test following a call to C<skip> will be skipped.  Use such
functionality when a test (or tests) would die if run.

    skip "Can't use forward slashes on Windows", 2;
    is(num_forward_slashes("/a/b"), 2);
    is(num_forward_slashes(normalize("/a//b")), 2);

=item skip_rest($reason?)

Skip the remaining tests.  If the remainder of the tests in the test file
would all fail due to some condition, use this function to skip them,
providing an optional C<$reason> as to why.

    unless $location ~~ "Wimbledon Common" {
	skip_rest "We can't womble, the remaining tests will fail";
	exit;
    }

    # tests requiring functional wombling
    ok(womble());
    # ...

Note that C<skip_rest> requires a C<plan> to be set, otherwise the
C<skip_rest> call will throw an error.

=head2 Evaluation of test conditions in boolean context

=item ok($condition, $description?), nok($condition, $description?)

The C<ok> function marks a test as passed if the given C<$condition>
evaluates to C<True>.  The C<nok> function marks a test as passed if the
given condition evaluates to C<False>.

    plan 2;

    my $pi = 3;
    ok($pi == 3, 'The variable $pi equals 3');
    nok(pi == 3, 'The constant pi does not equal 3');

=head2 Comparison of expected and actual output

=item is($obtained, $expected, $description?)

Marks a test as passed if the C<$obtained> and C<$expected> values are equal
(i.e., they compare as equal when using the C<'eq'> operator).  The function
accepts an optional C<$description> of the test.

    my $pi = 3;
    is($pi, 3, 'The variable $pi equals 3');

=item isnt($obtained, $expected, $description?)

Marks a test as passed if the C<$obtained> and C<$expected> values are
B<not> equal (i.e., they compare as B<not> equal when using the C<'eq'>
operator).  The function accepts an optional C<$description> of the test.

    isnt(pi, 3, 'The constant π is not equal to 3');

=item cmp_ok($obtained, $comparison, $expected, $description?)

The C<cmp_ok()> function compares the C<$obtained> and C<$expected> values
with the given C<$comparison> operator and passes the test if the comparison
yields a C<True> value.  For ease of use, operators may be passed as
strings, such as C<'=='> or C<'~~'>.

    cmp_ok('my spelling is apperling', '~~', /perl/, "bad speller");

=head2 Structural comparison with C<< infix:<eqv> >>

=item is_deeply

=head2 Numeric comparison within a tolerance of 1e-5

=item is_approx

=head2 Class membership testing

=item isa_ok

=head2 Grouping tests

The result of a group of subtests is only C<ok> if all subtests are C<ok>.

=item subtest

=head2 Exception testing

=item dies_ok
=item lives_ok
=item eval_dies_ok
=item eval_lives_ok
=item throws_like

=end pod
